A previously fit and healthy 75-year-old Chinese man presented after 12 h of central chest pain. ECG revealed an acute anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and the primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) team was activated. A drug eluting stent was deployed across the site of complete occlusion within the proximal left anterior descending artery, with a door-to-balloon time of only 30 min. The following day, the patient developed acute pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock while in the coronary care unit, necessitating intravenous inotropes, intubation, mechanical ventilation and insertion of an intra-aortic balloon pump. A new systolic murmur was audible on auscultation and echocardiography confirmed the presence of a VSR. The patient consented to urgent surgical repair of the VSR with a bovine pericardium patch the same day and was stepped down from surgical intensive care 8 days later. Repeat echocardiogram demonstrated the presence of a residual leak around one edge of the septal patch but, as the patient was improving clinically, he was treated conservatively with heart failure medication that included dual antiplatelet therapy, atorvastatin, carvedilol and frusemide (videos 3 and ​and4).4). Low blood pressure and severe renal impairment (creatinine 1.6 mg/dL; glomerular filtration rate 42 mL/min) precluded the addition of an ACE inhibitor. His ECG prior to discharge 40 days later following rehabilitation showed sinus rhythm and new onset of LBBB (QRS duration of 176 ms).

Unfortunately, 7 days later, he was re-hospitalised for worsening heart failure symptoms. Despite continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation and maximal medical therapy including levosimendan, he had persisting New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV symptoms. A small left-to-right shunt persisted around the edges of the previously repaired septum. The risks and potential merits of three different management strategies were discussed at length with the patient and his family members. The first option was to consider a repeat surgical repair to seal the VSR leak, although the anticipated operative mortality of redo surgery was predicted to be in excess of 40%. Second, comfort measures with palliative treatment of his NYHA class IV symptoms were discussed. Finally, implantation of a CRT device would normally be expected to improve the patient's haemodynamic status given the presence of an ejection fraction (EF) of 35%, broad LBBB and NYHA class IV symptoms (class I indications). However, increased left ventricular (LV) systolic pressure induced by biventricular pacing could exacerbate left-to-right shunting across the VSR leak and negate any benefits gained from CRT.1 Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, the use of CRT in a patient with active left-to-right shunting has not been described in the literature. The patient refused further cardiac surgery but agreed to implantation of a CRT-pacemaker (CRTP) as a treatment of last resort. The patient and family were fully cognisant that biventricular pacing may not alleviate his heart failure symptoms but could potentially exacerbate the situation, necessitating cessation of CRT. The agreed therapeutic goals were to improve the patient's symptoms and allow for discharge home. In view of his guarded prognosis and life expectancy that might not exceed 12 months, a CRTP was chosen rather than a CRT-defibrillator, as recommended in international guidelines.

