An 81-year-old male patient was admitted due to New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Class III-IV refractory congestive heart failure despite optimal medical treatment (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta-blockers and angiotensin II receptors antagonists, under high doses of oral furosemide). The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, chronic renal failure and pulmonary obstructive chronic disease. In 2001, he underwent myocardial revascularization surgery, as well as aortic valve replacement with a biological prosthesis. In 2003, the patient experienced an ischemic stroke.

Upon admission, lab tests showed impaired kidney function (urea 88 g/dL and creatinine 2.1 mg/dL), anemia (Hb 7 g/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (1100 mg/dL), and grade 3 to predominantly indirect bilirubin (based on patient's history and complementary tests, hemolytic anemia was assumed).

A multiplanar transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography was performed, which showed severely damaged ventricular function and mechanical prosthetic valve in a bileaflet normal function aortic position with a PVL, leading to severe regurgitant jet (8.5 mm wide and going into the middle third of the left ventricle). The regurgitant area was 43 mm2, with no images compatible with vegetations.

The EuroSCORE II was estimated in order to anticipate surgical mortality and assess surgical risk. Mortality rate was estimated at 53.41%. Considering this high mortality rate, percutaneous closure of the PVL was planned.

In the hemodynamic laboratory, the patient was hemodynamically instable, under mechanical ventilation and sedoanalgesia by an anesthesiologist. Before the procedure, 10,000 IU of sodium heparin were administered together with infective endocarditis prophylaxis, a procedure led by fluoroscopy and transesophageal echocardiogram.

The PVL was closed retrogradely with a right femoral artery puncture, using an 8 French introducer. First, a multipurpose catheter angiography was conducted to see the PVL. A wire-guided multipurpose catheter was placed towards the aortic valve plane. A Terumo hydrophilic guidewire was inserted in the catheter in order to go through the PVL, and then exchange was performed via a high-support guidewire (Amplatz). Afterwards, the Amplatzer Vascular Plug III (St. Jude Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA) release system was placed, and once on the dehiscence, the transesophageal echocardiography showed the end of the leak regurgitation jet. Then, the occlusion device was released, after lack of interference with the mechanical prosthesis was ensured.

The procedure was successful, and immediately after the implantation, a new transesophageal echocardiography showed no leak. There were no hemodynamic intercurrences during the procedure. The patient showed clinical improvement of symptoms at first and then he was hemodynamically stable. After a one-year follow-up, the patient progressed with no new hospitalizations due to heart failure, with an improved functional class and 11 mg/dL hemoglobin.

