A 56-year-old male at the age of 49 years developed a cerebral stroke which resolved spontaneously within a few days leaving no permanent damage and a magnetic resonance (MR)-scan was not performed. The patient had no cardiovascular risk factors apart from family history of ischemic heart disease.

Ten weeks later, the patient presented with third degree atrioventricular block (AV)-block initially thought to be associated with an acute Borrelia infection. However, the AV-block persisted despite antibiotic therapy and a dual-chamber pacemaker was implanted.

During hospitalization, the patient complained of fatigue, weight-loss, and night sweating; blood analyses demonstrated a sedimentation rate >100 mm/hr and anemia with a hemoglobin of 5.0 g/mL, thrombocytosis of 615×109 cells/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 95. There was no leukocytosis. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage was not suspected due to lack of symptoms from the gastrointestinal tract. The patient was 4 months later diagnosed with an ANCA positive vasculitis due to malaise, low grade fewer, arthritis, sinusitis (biopsy with acute and chronic inflammation, but no necrosis, granulomas or vasculitis signs), interstitial lung disease (ground-glass phenomenon in both lungs on high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan (biopsy was not performed) and myeloperoxidaseantineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA) positivity. There were no signs of mononeuritis multiplex, asthma, involvement of skin, kidneys, brain, or gastrointestinal canal. The Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS) score was 15.

The patient underwent treatment with steroids (for 6 months) and methotrexate, and the vasculitis remission was achieved including normalization of MPO-ANCA levels. After 2 years methotrexate monotherapy was discontinued.

After 1 year, the patient presented with respiratory tract symptoms including dyspnea and increasing MPO-ANCA levels. Consequently, steroid and methotrexate therapy was resumed. However, the patient did not improve in respiratory symptoms and the patient was referred for a multidisciplinary examination, including a cardiac, pulmonary, and rheumatic evaluation. The cardiac evaluation included a normal echocardiographic examination with a preserved left ventricular (LV) function, no signs of pulmonary hypertension and a mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation determined by transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE).

A treadmill exercise test was performed demonstrating severely reduced functional capacity with a peak exercise of 113W (52% of expected) and an adequate chronotropic response. A pulmonary functional test was performed demonstrating severe obstructive pulmonary disease with forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 1.1 L (29% of predicted), forced vital capacity (FVC) 3.0 L (63% of predicted), a diffusion capacity of 66% and a Tiffeneau-Pinelli index of 37%. A ventilation/perfusion lung scan was performed demonstrating bilateral pulmonary embolisms. In addition, an HRCT was performed demonstrating ground glass phenomenon in both lungs. Testing for thrombophilia and antiphospholipid antibodies revealed no abnormality. BVAS score was 13. Anticoagulant therapy (rivaroxaban) was added to the treatment with methylprednisolone (3 pulses), prednisolone, methotrexate and bronchodilators (LABA/LAMA combination).

During the following 12 weeks, the patient’s dyspnea worsened, and a new echocardiographic examination demonstrated a dilated left ventricle with reduced LV function with an ejection fraction (EF)=30% to 35%; and on this basis, the dual-chamber pacemaker (PM) was upgraded to a cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)-PM. As a result of symptomatic improvement of dyspnea after dual-chamber implantation, aortic valve replacement was not relevant.

The patient was closely monitored at the Pulmonology Center for interstitial lung disease, at the Rheumatology Center for connective tissue diseases and at the Department of Cardiology. A development of pneumonia was treated successfully with antibiotics.

After 12 weeks, a new cardiac examination was performed. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle and a transesophageal echocardiography showed a tricuspid aortic valve in which the right coronary cusp was immobile/fixed and edematous causing a severe insufficiency with a vena contracta between 8 mm and 9 mm.

We assessed that the substantial cause of dyspnea was due to severe aortic regurgitation. On this basis, the patient was assigned for thoracotomy and implantation of an aortic valve bioprosthesis. Histological analysis of the resectates of aortic cusps showed that 2 of these cusps contained fibrosis and myxoid degeneration. The last of these cusps contained inflammatory alterations, fibrosis, and thickening. An abundance of lymphocytes and plasma cells were evident as well as thickened vessels and granulomatous structures.

After uncomplicated surgery, an intermittent fast atrial flutter was diagnosed. After amiodarone loading, beta blocker initiation, and reprogramming of the pacemaker to DDI mode, ventricular frequency was normalized, and improvement of dyspnea was seen.

