A 92-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with acute heart failure due to severe AS. TAVI was the only option available for this patient, as he was a high-risk patient for SAVR (logistic EuroSCORE: 18.3%; Society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk of mortality: 11.2%). Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated severe calcification and stenosis of the peripheral arteries, whereas aortography showed severe stenosis of the right common iliac artery and occlusion of the left external iliac artery. Left subclavian artery stenosis with calcification was also noted on the CT. Therefore, the TF and TS access routes were deemed unsuitable for the present case, owing to the anatomy of the patient’s vascular access. In addition, severe calcification was observed in the sinotubular junction, which could be an important risk factor for aortic dissection in TA- and TAo-TAVI with a balloon-expanding bioprosthetic valve of 26-mm diameter. As the maximum distance between the aortic valve annulus and the sheath insertion point was only 59.5-mm (because of severe calcification in the upper ascending aorta, we decided to perform TAo-TAVI with a self-expanding bioprosthetic valve using a vascular graft, in order to secure an appropriate length for safe sheath manipulation.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia and mechanical ventilation. A reverse L-shaped lower hemisternotomy from the right second intercostal space to the xiphoid process was performed. A 5-Fr pigtail catheter with a metal marker (Medikit Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was inserted through the left radial artery. An epicardial pacing lead was then placed on the diaphragmatic surface of the right ventricle. Aortography was performed to measure a distance of 60 mm from the aortic annulus. At the entry site, a 10-mm diameter vascular graft (Gelweave; Vascutek Ltd., Renfrewshire, Scotland) was sutured to the ascending aorta at an angle of 45° under a partial aortic clamp. After the insertion of an 18 Fr DrySeal sheath (W. L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) into the vascular graft, the native aortic valve was predilated with a 20-mm Z-MED II balloon (NuMED Inc., Hopkinton, NY, USA). A 29 mm CoreValve Evolut-R (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) bioprosthetic valve was subsequently implanted. Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated only mild paravalvular leakage, and aortography showed mild aortic regurgitation with patent coronary arteries. The vascular graft was ligated and resected after sheath extraction. The duration of the procedure was 188 minutes, and the patient’s clinical course was uneventful.

