A 57-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the Emergency Department due to anxiety, confusion, tachycardia, and dyspnea. The patient did not report any significant past medical history. The patient did not take any medication, did not consume alcohol, and did not smoke. Admission vital signs were noted: regular radial pulse with an average heart rate of 110 beats per minute, arterial pressure of 180/90 mmHg and peripheral oxygen blood saturation (SpO 2) of 90% in ambient air and spontaneous breathing with an average respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute. The axillary temperature was normal. Cardiac examination revealed a regular rate and rhythm with normal heart sounds and a holosystolic murmur at the apex. Chest examination noted symmetrical thoracic activity, normal expansion, and bilateral basal end-inspiratory crackles. Abdominal examination was normal; no swelling of the feet or legs was detected but the extremities were cold. The patient was alert, answered simple questions accurately and was able to execute simple tasks; the pupils were equal, round and normally reactive to light; the neurological examination was normal. The patient lived in the countryside and used a pellet stove to heat his bedroom without any aeration system. An arterial blood gas analysis showed respiratory acidosis with hyperlactatemia, increased anion gap, and a concentration of COHb above 15%. CXR detected pulmonary edema. The ECG showed sinus tachycardia with ST-segment elevation in the precordial V1-V6 leads.

The patient rapidly decompensated with the onset of hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mmHg), worsening hypoxemia, and respiratory acidosis.

He was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Acute Heart Failure (AHF) with cardiogenic shock and respiratory failure was suspected. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed and demonstrated globally reduced left ventricular contractile function with ejection fraction of 20-25% and a severe mitral regurgitation; the pericardium was normal. The patient was treated with ventilatory and circulatory support. He underwent an orotracheal intubation under sedation with subsequent lung protective mechanical ventilation and inotropic support. The patient responded quickly, and peripheral perfusion was restored. As the patient was confused and had cardiovascular failure and acidosis, hyperbaric oxygen therapy was started and maintained until COHb concentration was reduced to normal values (<3%)25,50 . Blood cell count, electrolytes, renal, liver, and thyroid function were all within the normal range.
Creatine kinase (CK), creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB), troponin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were higher than the normal value. The amino-terminal fragment of pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was slightly elevated. The ECG showed a pattern indicating an Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS). Given the ECG findings and the increased concentration of myocardial necrosis markers, a coronary angiography was performed but it did not detect any stenosis or other abnormalities of the coronary arteries. It was supposed that ECG finding was related to coronary vasospasm related to CO intoxication. After 12 hours of mechanical support, lung function improved, and no further evidence of cardiopulmonary failure was observed. The subsequent arterial blood gas analysis was normal, and the radiogram of the chest showed no further evidence of pulmonary edema. The cardiac necrosis markers decreased to normal levels. The TTE was repeated and detected an improved EF to 50-60% with no global dysfunction; mitral regurgitation was no longer documented. The patient was extubated and discharged to the Internal Medicine (IM) ward for monitoring and care. He remained hemodynamically stable for the following two days and discharged. Three days later, he was re-admitted to the Emergency Room (ER) with the same cardiovascular condition. He had the same TTE pattern of the previous admission with decreased ejection fraction (EF) and global left ventricular dysfunction. The measured COHb level was higher than 20%. He died from acute cardiac failure and cardiac arrest with pulseless electric activity (PEA) despite prompt treatment and resuscitative measures.

