A 25-year-old male who presented with acute onset of chest discomfort and respiratory distress for 2 hours. There was no history of any cardiorespiratory illness in the past, trauma, no history of neurological disease, loss of consciousness or vomiting. Admission vitals were a heart rate of 94 beats per minutes, blood pressure of 184/98 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 38 breaths per minute. Auscultation of the chest revealed bilateral coarse crepitations in all lung fields. The pulse oximetry revealed a saturation of 88% with 6 L/min of oxygen via a Hudson mask. Chest radiograph showed bilateral lung infiltrates. Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed an inverted T waves in all the leads and this was further investigated with echocardiography (Echo) which revealed a normal chamber anatomy with global hypokinesia (basal > apical) with mid ventricular regional wall motion abnormalities (RWMA) and an ejection fraction of 30%. After admission to the intensive care unit, the patient complained of an occipital headache associated with rapid deterioration in the sensorium to a Glasgow coma score (GCS) of 6 (E2V2M2) following which the patient was intubated with rapid sequence intubation and mechanically ventilated on volume control mode. Post-intubation, computed tomography (CT) scan of the head showed a hematoma of the left cerebellar hemisphere caused due to a cerebellar arteriovenous malformation (AVM) causing herniation of the cerebellar tonsils. The lung status deteriorated progressively, wherein despite high FiO2 of 90% and PEEP of 12 the PaO2 was 58 mmHg and PaCO2 were 41 mmHg. The hemodynamic profile was unstable and systolic BP and mean arterial pressure (MAP) had to be maintained in the range of 120 mmHg and 60 mmHg with a combination of Inj. Dobutamine and Inj. Norepinephrine. The patient underwent conservative management for the cerebellar bleed as the relatives refused to give consent for surgical depression because of the high risk of perioperative mortality because of poor cardiopulmonary status and unstable hemodynamics. The patient was treated with head end elevation of 30 degrees, osmotherapy with 3% saline, hyperventilation to a target PaCO2 of 35 mmHg, Inj. Furosemide 20 mg and an Inj. Propofol infusion (50–100 mcg.kg −1.min −1) was started to provide neuroprotection and reduce intracranial pressure. Over 24 hours, the patient progressed to multi-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), i.e., a poor cardiac function requiring dual inotropic support, low lung compliance and inability to maintain oxygenation despite high FiO2 and PEEP and raised ICP resulting in tonsillar herniation and died 12 hours later.

