The 62-year-old male patient underwent heart transplantation on November 2, 2019 for arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy of the right ventricle. After transplantation, he remained hospitalized due to a series of complications including pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). He required 56 days of mechanical ventilation and was in need of intermittent renal replacement therapy. Echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55% with no signs of transplant rejection. His immunosuppression regimen consisted of cyclosporine A (target range 135 ± 30 ng/mL), mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg b.i.d., and prednisone 10 mg q.d. No anti-lymphocyte globulins had been used as induction therapy. Blood count revealed anemia and leukopenia, the latter likely being caused by immunosuppressive medication, yet not improving significantly under dose reduction. He received cotrimoxazole and due to cytomegalovirus (CMV) high-risk constellation (D + R−), ganciclovir had been administered for 4 months after transplantation and was then switched to valganciclovir prophylaxis. Concurrent medication did not include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers.

On March 13, 2020 (day 1), the patient developed fever (39.9°C), tachycardia (105 bpm), and a sore throat. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from throat swab revealed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Body temperature quickly normalized within the first 12 hours. Blood oxygen saturation levels remained stable in the range of 96%-100% without oxygen supplementation at a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. Besides mild rhinorrhea and impaired exercise capacity, the patient showed no other symptoms, in particular no cough or dyspnea at rest. On day 7, a second increase in temperature up to 38.4°C was observed, which resolved spontaneously. This episode went along with a mild rise and peak of C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-6, and pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (proBNP) levels and lymphopenia. A computed tomography scan showed regressive postinflammatory alterations after bacterial pneumonia and ARDS, but no clear signs of COVID-19 pneumonia or bacterial superinfection. Procalcitonin levels remained low and blood cultures showed no bacterial or fungal growth. We decided to administer hydroxychloroquine (loading dose 400 mg b.i.d. followed by 200 mg b.i.d.) from day 7 to 14. Remarkably, while the patient was free of any marginal residual clinical symptom since day 20, SARS-CoV-2 PCR was positive on days 1, 5, 7, 11, 18, 21, 25, 28, 33, and still on day 35. Concurrent with the second onset of fever we observed an increased viral load after day 7 that slowly returned to the level of infection onset. Whereas the patient already was asymptomatic, virus culture on days 18 and 21 still confirmed active virus replication.

As proBNP levels increased and decreased simultaneously with the inflammation parameters, we considered a COVID-19-related myocardial infection, yet did not confirm it by myocardial biopsy. No signs of clinical deterioration, notably no signs of cardiorespiratory impairment, were observed. Weaning from hemodialysis was successful (day 1) and urine output and body weight remained stable. Cyclosporine A dose was adjusted several times over the course of infection to achieve a therapeutic range of 135 ± 30 ng/mL. Otherwise, medication including immunosuppression was continued unchanged except for an increase of prednisone dose to 50 mg for 3 days and 25 mg for another 3 days from day 14 on for treatment of acute gout in the left knee.

