The patient was a 4-month-old male baby (body weight 6.7 kg) born to a G4P4 34-year-old healthy mother via vaginal delivery. The gestational age (GA) was 40 weeks and the birth body weight (BBW) was 3550 g. The delivery was smooth and the Apgar score was 8 → 9.
However, cyanosis during crying was noted by his mother when he was three months old. Episodes of bluish color to the skin occurred frequently. Echocardiography was performed at a local clinic and TOF was diagnosed. He was subsequently transferred to our hospital for further management. After admission, heart computed tomography (CT) showed TOF and persistent left superior vena cava (SVC). Cardiac catheterization revealed the pulmonary arteries (PA) were of adequate size with a McGoon ratio of 1.9. Because of the frequent hypoxic spells and adequate PA size, we decided to perform corrective repair of TOF. Hypoxic episodes (SpO2 60%～75%) occurred intermittently despite medical treatment and oxygen supply pre-operatively. Surgical intervention including repair of ventricular septal defect (VSD), infundibulectomy and right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) reconstruction with a trans-annular patch by using fresh autologous pericardium were performed smoothly under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with aortic and bicaval cannulation. The atrial septal defect (ASD) was left open. The CPB time was 208 minutes and the aortic cross-clamping time was 148 minutes. After CPB was stopped, RV pressure (38/15 mmHg) and main PA pressure (24/15 mmHg) were measured in the operating room by direct needle puncture before closure of the sternal wound.


Ventilator support, inhaled nitric oxide (iNO), inotropic support, and antibiotics were given post-operatively. After surgery, his systolic blood pressure (SBP) was about 70～80 mmHg but desaturation persisted and his oxygenation saturation (SpO2) was 75%～85% despite the use of a mechanical ventilator (FiO2 1.0) and iNO 20 ppm. On the next day after the cardiac surgery, SBP was still about 80 mmHg but central venous pressure was up to 20-22 mmHg and SpO2 decreased further to 60%-75%. RV failure was diagnosed. Because acute RV failure had not improved despite maximal medical treatments, ECMO setup was considered. At that time, although desaturation persisted, BP could be maintained by volume management and the use of inotropic agents, and a right-to-left shunt through an ASD by echocardiography was also noted. Chest x rays showed clear lung fields, which meant no pulmonary edema. Therefore, we decided to introduce VV- ECMO, which was performed smoothly with a double lumen catheter (MAQUAT, Rastatt, Germany) from cannulation through the right internal jugular vein into the right atrium. Afterwards, the unstable hemodynamics, respiratory distress, and oxygenation gradually improved, and thus inotropics, ECMO FiO2, and iNO were tapered day by day. On the 13th postoperative day (POD), the VV- ECMO, with a total supporting time of 288 hours, was removed. The usage of iNO was discontinued on POD 24 and extubation of the endotracheal tube was conducted on POD 34. The patient was discharged on POD 46 in stable condition. Echocardiography was checked before discharge and showed a residual VSD of 0.2 cm, ASD, residual RVOT pressure gradient (PG) of 25 mmHg, moderate pulmonary regurgitation (PR), and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 69%.
He grew and developed well, reaching a body weight of 18 kg when he was 5 years old. Echocardiography performed at that time showed a residual VSD of 0.2 cm, ASD, residual RVOT PG of 13 mmHg, mild-to-moderate PR, and LVEF of 85%. Therefore, ASD was occluded percutaneously with an Amplatzer occluder (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA). The patient is in functional class I of New York Heart Association and is currently drug free.

