A 59-year-old woman who lives in a rural area of Republic of Korea presented to the emergency center of a tertiary hospital with a fever that started 3 days prior. She had no known underlying diseases. On admission, she had blood pressure of 90/40 mmHg, pulse rate of 68 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 20 breaths per min, and a body temperature of 38.3 °C. She had no memory of any insect bites, but reported that she had rabbits, dogs, and chickens living on her property. Neither eschar nor skin rash were observed on physical examination.

After a series of tests, laboratory tests revealed bicytopenia with a white blood cell count of 1200/mm3 (neutrophil count 280/μL), hemoglobin level of 13.9 g/dL, and a platelet count of 113,000/mm3. The serum levels of C-reactive protein, ferritin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were 0.05 mg/dL, 3970.62 ng/mL, 67 U/L, 28 U/L, and 781 U/L, respectively. Serum cardiac enzymes including troponin I and creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB) isoenzyme were all within normal range. The clinical course of the patient’s laboratory findings. A baseline electrocardiography (ECG) displayed a normal sinus rhythm and there was no definite cardiomegaly nor pulmonary congestion in the chest X-ray.

Based on the clinical manifestations, history of raising livestock in rural area, and laboratory finding, tick borne disorder such as SFTS was suspected. In addition, hematologic disorder cannot be ruled out. To determine a microbiological cause of fever, blood cultures were ordered. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was executed to screen for the SFTSV medium (M) segment in blood, indirect immunofluorescence was performed to screen for scrub typhus and Hantaan virus, and passive hemagglutination testing was performed to screen for Leptospira. A bone marrow sample was also taken to evaluate the grade of bicytopenia. The sample revealed decreased trilineage cells with hypocellular marrow, which suggested marrow failure due to systemic infection.

On hospital day (HD) 3, the patient complained of chest discomfort. Subsequently, her blood pressure dropped to 55/37 mmHg and she developed bradycardia (43 bpm). The patient’s heart rhythm also switched to an alternating rhythm of sinus bradycardia and junctional bradycardia. A chest X-ray displayed distinct pulmonary edema. At that time, the serum troponin I titer was elevated (1.60 ng/mL).

Laboratory examinations from HD 3 again revealed bicytopenia with a white blood cell count of 2200/mm3 (neutrophil count 230/μL), hemoglobin level of 12.7 g/dL, and platelet count of 84,000/mm3. The serum levels of C-reactive protein, ferritin, and LDH were 0.01 mg/dL, 7921.17 ng/mL, and 1222 U/L, respectively. Bedside echocardiography revealed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 10%) with normal LV chamber size and a mildly edematous LV posterior wall. An additional cardiac echography file shows this in more detail.

The patient then suddenly developed an atrio-ventricular conduction abnormality simultaneously with LV dysfunction. As such, it was suspected that the patient was experiencing a myocardial infarction of the right or left circumflex coronary artery, or fulminant myocarditis involving the conduction system. A coronary angiography was performed immediately, which revealed good distal flow through both coronary arteries and a lack of significant stenosis. Due to the patient’s severe orthopnea, agitation, and refractory shock, an endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) could not be performed.

Despite intravenous administration of norepinephrine and dopamine, the patient’s blood pressure did not recover. Therefore, VA ECMO was applied to the patient via the femoral vein and artery. The patient’s blood pressure dropped to nearly 0 mmHg and she developed a near total akinesia of the heart in the time it took to initiate ECMO, but cardiopulmonary resuscitation was not performed.

On the same day 3, the patient’s blood test result came back positive for SFTSV. Consequently, immune suppressive therapy (IST) with prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and 3 days of intravenous immunoglobulin (20 g/day) was initiated. In addition, the patient’s plasma was tested for a panel of 12 different cytokines. Among the panel, the concentrations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α were 3.52 pg/mL, 2.56 pg/mL, and 20.89 pg/mL, respectively. These levels were much higher than the mean values of ten Korean healthy adults, measured in our lab for research purposes, which were 1.55 pg/mL, 1.40 pg/mL, and 3.25 pg/mL, respectively. Levels of platelet derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB were also lower (347.94 pg/mL) compared to healthy adults (2347.76 pg/mL).

On HD 4, the patient still had bicytopenia with a white blood cell count of 2700/mm3 (neutrophil count 1760/μL), hemoglobin level of 11.0 g/dL, and a platelet count of 75,000/mm3. The serum levels of C-reactive protein, AST, ALT, and LDH were 0.01 mg/dL, 300 U/L, 68 U/L, and 1709 U/L, respectively. The patient’s troponin level was 101.56 ng/ml and the level of mass CK-MB was 115.4 ng/mL.

On HD 7, the patient’s heart started to beat again. Further, on HD 12, she was successfully weaned from VA ECMO. By HD 21, cardiac function completely recovered and the patient was discharged without significant complications.

