A 60-year-old gentleman, with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension, was referred for symptomatic end-stage heart failure, INTERMACS profile 4. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed globally impaired left ventricular ejection fraction 10%, left ventricular diastolic diameter 7.7 cm and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Left and right heart catheterization showed significant left main and triple vessel disease, cardiac index 1.65 l/min/m2 and pulmonary vascular resistance of 3.67 Woods units. Thallium myocardial perfusion scan showed non-viable myocardium.

He also suffered from a symptomatic enlarging infra-renal abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Computerized tomography scan showed an AAA measuring 5.8 × 6 cm that progressed to 6.9 × 6.6 cm over 6 months. In view of his poor cardiac function, the referral hospital refused him general anaesthesia.

Our multi-disciplinary team opted for an implantable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) with HeartMate 3 (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) as bridge to transplant with sequential open AAA repair.

After general anaesthesia, median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass (aortic and bi-caval cannulation) was ensued. Tricuspid annuloplasty with Sovering Tricuspid Band (size 30) (Sorin Biomedica, Salluggia, Italy) via right atriotomy without cardioplegia was performed. LVAD inflow cannula was attached to the left ventricular apex and the outflow graft was sewn onto the ascending aorta. Bypass was weaned and LVAD flow adjusted with trans-oesophageal echocardiogram guidance to 3LPM; speed 4900 RPM. Right ventricular function was satisfactory, and intensive care unit stay was uneventful. He was extubated on postoperative Day 2. Swan-Ganz catheter facilitated haemodynamic and fluid management. Heparin infusion was started on postoperative Day 2 with an activated partial thromboplastin time of 45–55 s.

On postoperative Day 7, the patient underwent open AAA repair. Heparin infusion was stopped 4 h prior to general anaesthesia. Low-dose adrenaline and dopamine infusions were given to support right heart function. Through a midline laparotomy incision, the AAA was dissected out. Prior to cross-clamping, the patient was started on nitroprusside and nitroglycerine infusions. The infra-renal aorta was anastomosed end-to-end to a 20-mm Hemashield woven Dacron tube graft (Maquet, Getinge Group, Germany) with continuous sutures. Noradrenaline infusion was started prior to cross-clamp release and fluid boluses were given to maintain adequate blood pressure. Cross-clamp time was 55 min, operating time was 139 min and blood loss was 50 ml. The patient was haemodynamically stable throughout the procedure with pump parameters unchanged. Heparin was administered 6 h postoperatively.

Postoperative course was uneventful. He was maintained on aspirin and warfarin with target INR of 2–3. He was discharged home on postoperative Day 30 with follow up CT showing complete repair.

