A 75-year-old Japanese female (height: 150 cm; weight: 43 kg) was emergently admitted to our hospital for worsening HF due to ischemic cardiomyopathy, with a left ventricular ejection fraction less than 35%. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus and smoking. She had been diagnosed with PAD at 73 years of age, and she underwent amputation surgery above the left knee owing to ischemic and diabetic necrosis 1 year prior. Although her symptoms for HF had improved after resting in Fowler’s position and treatment with diuretics, beta blockers, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, she complained of rest pain in her right lower leg 1 week after admission. Physical findings showed absent pedal pulses, and shiny smooth, pallor, cold skin of the right leg. The ankle-brachial index (ABI) was unmeasurable at rest. A computed tomography (CT) angiogram showed chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the right superficial femoral artery (SFA) and left external iliac artery. She was diagnosed as critical limb ischemia (clinical limb stage: Fontaine III). We decided to perform PVI for revascularization of the right SFA during this hospitalization because of severe pain uncontrolled by pain relief medicines. We considered that she would still need to be in Fowler’s position on the catheterization table during PVI to prevent worsening HF. After insertion of a 7 Fr R2P Glidesheath slender sheath and advancement of a 7 Fr 120-cm long SlenGuide catheter into the right iliac artery, the patient was fixed in Fowler’s position with the Vac-Lok fixation device. Initial angiography showed total occlusion of the left SFA from the ostium to the distal portion. We advanced a 0.014 inch Halberd guidewire (Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) with a 2.5 Fr 150-cm long Corsair Armet microcatheter (Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) into the right SFA. We successfully crossed the wire into the CTO lesion of the right SFA, and we dilated the lesion with a 4.0–100 mm Metacross rapid-exchange balloon catheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). After predilation, we implanted two rapid-exchange 6.0–100 mm R2P Misago stents (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) with a 200-cm long shaft system in the CTO lesion of the right SFA. Following postdilation of the stents with a 5.0–100 mm Metacross balloon catheter, we confirmed favorable blood flow below the right knee without residual stenosis and dissection. The guiding sheath in the right iliac artery and the sheath in the left RA were withdrawn and the puncture site was managed via continuous compression using TR Band (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), a hemostasis device used for transradial catheterization. We did not use vasodilators, and we had no access site-related complications. HF did not worsen during PVI nor in the postoperative period. The ABI had improved to 0.78 in the right leg, and she was discharged 1 week after her PVI. At 6 months after PVI, she was completely free from pain in her right lower leg. ABI at rest of the leg maintained a relatively good level (0.72) and chronic HF had been well managed medically.

