We present the case of a 22-year-old female patient, with a history of a seizure episode when she was 18 years-old, smoking habits and who was on oral contraceptives (desogestrel, a progestogen-only pill). She was also breastfeeding her five month old son (first-born child). A few minutes after an intense argument with her boyfriend, she had a syncope episode. Her relative described seizure-like movements, which lasted approximately five minutes. Afterwards, she was taken to the emergency department for evaluation.

At admission, her heart rate was 105 bpm and blood pressure was 109/74 mmHg. Cardiac and pulmonary auscultation were normal. She denied having chest pain, respiratory distress, palpitations or recent infection. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed, revealing a discrete ST-segment elevation (<0.5 mm) in leads II, III, aVF and V2 to V6 and a slightly prolonged corrected QT interval (474 ms). The arterial blood gas analysis revealed compensated respiratory alkalosis without hypoxemia and the blood workup showed normal leukocyte count and C-reactive protein, elevated N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (3300 pg/mL), positive troponin I (1.92 ng/mL, cut-off for myocardial infarction >0.1 ng/mL) and elevated D-dimer (1.2 μg/mL). A CT pulmonary angiogram was also performed but revealed no abnormalities. The echocardiogram showed akinesia of the midventricular and apical segments of all walls and hypercontractile basal segments, resulting in a severely depressed left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) (29%). The right ventricle was undilated with a normal longitudinal function. No relevant valve disease or pericardial effusion were found. The patient was then transferred to the intensive cardiac care unit. The next day, the ECG showed a biphasic T wave in lead V2 and negative T waves in leads I, II, III, aVF, aVL and V3 to V6. A coronary angiography was performed and revealed no significant lesions of the epicardial coronary arteries. The ventriculography, however, showed an apical ballooning ventricle with a moderately depressed LVEF.

The differential diagnoses considering the systolic dysfunction were myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA), myocarditis, peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) and Takotsubo syndrome (TTS). She initiated therapy with bromocriptine, carvedilol, captopril and spironolactone.

During in-hospital stay, she remained clinically and hemodynamically stable. The echocardiogram performed five days after admission showed an improvement in LVEF and wall motion abnormalities. A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was also performed (seven days after admission), revealing a non-dilated LV, with normal LVEF (55%), no wall motion abnormalities and absence of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). The patient was also evaluated by a consultant neurologist and underwent an electroencephalogram and a magnetic resonance imaging of the brain (brain-MRI), which were both normal. She was discharged with bisoprolol 5 mg qd and referred to the cardiology outpatient clinic.

The follow-up echocardiogram performed two months after discharge showed preserved LVEF. As for the ECG, the QT interval was normal and repolarization abnormalities had disappeared.

