Patient II was a 61-year-old male with a longstanding history of ischemic heart failure following posterior wall myocardial infarction in 2002. The patient received coronary artery bypass graft surgery in 2012 and was equipped with a LVAD (HVAD HeartWare) due to advanced heart failure symptoms in 2013. The patient had received a two-chamber ICD (Biotronik, Lumax 540 DR-T) in 2010 following repeated ventricular tachycardia. Since 2020 the patient had experienced repeated episodes of ventricular tachycardia, repeatedly terminated by electrical cardioversion and followed by intensified medical antiarrhythmic drug therapy (AADT). In July 2021, an electrical storm episode led to five consecutive shock therapies, demanding a further increase of AADT. Clinically severe heart failure symptoms NYHA class III accompanied by end-organ failure was evident. Coronary angiogram did not reveal any new stenosis. An electroanatomical mapping procedure (CARTO 3; Biosense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) revealed low-voltage-areas in the inferolateral areas of the left ventricle, reaching towards the LVAD cannula insertion. A catheter ablation procedure in the inferolateral area remained without success regarding rhythm restoration; in fact, following the ablation procedure, a change in VT morphology was registered. The patient remained under constant slow ventricular tachycardia tolerated under LVAD-therapy, with a cardiac output of 4.5–5 L/min.

For patient II, a Varian True BeamTM STX was chosen for treatment in order to account for the reduced cardiopulmonary condition and avoid longer treatment times. The prespecified ITV was enlarged by 4 mm to result in the PTV. The treatment plan was created with the Varian EclipseTM treatment planning system (Varian Medical Systems Inc; Palo Alto, CA; version 15.5) and consisted of four noncoplanar volumetric modulated arcs using 6‑MV flattening filter-free photon beams. The dose distribution was calculated using the AAA/Acuros AXB algorithm.

Follow-up

Patient II displayed a complex clinical course following radioablation, with initially persisting but slightly decelerated VT. Heart rate decreased from around 190 beats per minute (bpm) to around 130 bpm within the first 6 days after radioablation, with a further decrease to 100–110 bpm within the following 14 days after ablation. Initially, AADT could be carefully reduced; a first attempt at external cardioversion 2 weeks after radioablation remained unsuccessful. Three weeks following cRA, the ongoing VT again accelerated and reached a rate around 140 bpm. An attempt at bilateral stellate ganglion blockage was undertaken with a short-term benefit; the patient could be stimulated and the heart rate controlled by a pacemaker for several days before the VT again accelerated with subsiding effect of the blockage. Finally, the patient deceased 50 days following the radioablation procedure due to progressive end-organ failure.


