A 30-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on 8 July 8 2021 because of morbid obesity (height: 175 cm, weight: 143 kg, body mass index: 46.7 kg/m2). The patient had a long history of hypertension and diabetes. He had been admitted and treated at Luzhou People’s Hospital 1 month previously for edema of both lower limbs and difficulty lying flat. He was diagnosed with cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 13%. The patient attempted to lose weight through diet and exercise but was unsuccessful. Therefore, he visited our hospital for bariatric surgery. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed enlargement of the whole heart, thickening of the left ventricular wall and septum (approximately 2 cm at the thickest part; i.e., posterior wall and septum), and a weakened heartbeat. In addition, the left ventricular measurements showed that the ejection fraction was 23.81%, the end-diastolic volume was 348.84 mL, the end-systolic volume was 265.78 mL, the stroke volume was 83.06 mL, the cardiac output was 7.94 L/min, and the left ventricular mass was 427.55 g. The patient was diagnosed with metabolic syndrome, OCM, heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, nephritic syndrome, and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. He provided written consent for both treatment and publication of this case report. The reporting of this study conforms to the CARE guidelines.

After a multidisciplinary team discussion, we suggested that the patient attempt to lose weight through diet and further improve his cardiac function before surgery. The cardiologists developed a series of guideline-directed medical treatments to reduce the cardiac preload and afterload. In addition, considering the presence of nephritis syndrome, the nephrologists suggested treatment with an angiotensin receptor blocker to reduce urinary protein and protect the patient’s renal function. Moreover, the nutritionists recommended a short-term low-calorie diet to properly control the patient’s weight before surgery, and this diet was then replaced with a special medical formula food for kidney disease (<1 week). The endocrinologists adjusted the patient’s insulin regimen to improve his blood glucose fluctuations. After 2 weeks of treatment, the patient’s blood glucose, blood pressure, and heart rate were effectively controlled; his physical condition had significantly improved; and his cardiac function had recovered to NYHA functional class II to III. Additionally, he had lost 10 kg in weight because of the diet change. Therefore, we scheduled laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy under general anesthesia for further treatment.

At 11:50 on 23 July 2021, after the patient entered the operating room, we began monitoring his noninvasive blood pressure, electrocardiogram, and pulse oxygen saturation. Before general anesthesia, radial artery catheterization and deep vein catheterization were performed under local anesthesia for continuous invasive blood pressure and cardiac output monitoring. A combination of glucose, insulin, and potassium (500 mL of 10% glucose + 10 mL of 10% potassium chloride + 10 U of insulin) was administered via pump to improve the myocardial metabolism and prevent arrhythmia. At 12:00, after sufficient preoxygenation, anesthesia was induced and an endotracheal tube was placed. The patient’s blood pressure dropped after anesthetic induction at 12:05, and phenylephrine was administered via pump at 0.1 to 1.0 µg/kg/min to maintain the blood pressure. Transesophageal echocardiography was used to monitor the patient’s cardiac status, followed by slow input of 500 mL of fluid and a gradual reduction of phenylephrine. The operation was completed at 14:30, and 10 mL of ropivacaine was given for incision infiltration anesthesia. The intraoperative bleeding volume was 20 mL, and the fluid infusion volume was 700 mL. After the operation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for further treatment and monitoring. One day later, he was successfully extubated and transferred back to the general ward. On 30 July 2021, the patient had fully recovered and was discharged from the hospital.

At the 1-year follow-up, the patient had lost 52 kg of weight. Unexpectedly, his cardiac function had also significantly improved. His daily activities no longer caused fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea, and he was able to exercise, which had been unimaginable before surgery. In addition, during follow-up, the patient had stopped taking irbesartan, furosemide, and prazosin, and the irbesartan had been replaced with valsartan. The patient had NYHA functional class IV symptoms on admission, and he still had NYHA functional class II to III symptoms despite effective treatment before bariatric surgery; at the 1-year follow-up, however, his cardiac function had recovered to NYHA functional class I.

