A 25-year-old female patient with a history of diffuse toxic goiter and non-adherence to antithyroid medication presented to our ECMO service with acute symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, cardiogenic shock, and acute respiratory failure. Her transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed severely enlarged RV with severely reduced systolic and diastolic function, paradoxical septal motion, severely dilated right atrium (RA), severe tricuspid regurgitation, and dilation of the inferior vena cava indicative of aRHF. She had to be intubated and mechanically ventilated for hypoxic respiratory failure. A diagnostic computed tomography pulmonary angiography ruled out pulmonary embolism but demonstrated RV dilation and paradoxical interventricular septal bowing suggestive of RV strain. Her labs were obtained and remarkable for thyroid stimulating hormone <0.01 micro-IU/mL (Ref 0.4–5.5 micro-IU/mL), free thyroxine 2.3 ng/dL (Ref range 0.8–1.8 ng/dL), T3 resin uptake 49% (Ref range 22–25%), and total thyroxine of 5.0 mcg/dL (Ref range 5.1–11.9 mcg/dL). This patient had the uncommon diagnosis of aRHF secondary to thyrotoxicosis and required high doses of inotropes and vasopressors to maintain hemodynamic stability. Using fluoroscopy, we inserted a ProtekDuo cannula through the right internal jugular vein (RIJV) in the V-P position. The cannula was connected to an ECMO circuit with oxygenator for respiratory support. Once on mechanical circulatory support (MCS), we were able to rapidly wean vasopressors and inotropes. A post-cannulation TTE demonstrated decompression of the right heart chambers. The patient was treated with methimazole 40 mg daily for ten days, and free thyroxine level decreased to <0.3 ng/dL. Methimazole was resumed 11 days later at a dose of 20 mg daily due to rising free thyroxine levels, with peak of 6.5 ng/dL. The patient was treated with that dose for 12 days, and the dose was then reduced to 10 mg daily. The patient was supported with ProtekDuo for seven days. With improvement of her endocrine function, she also showed cardiac recovery with improving RV and respiratory function. The membrane oxygenator was removed after three days, leaving the ProtekDuo cannula as an RVAD for four days. She was extubated on day 8, required nine days in the ICU, and was discharged home on hospital day 26. A follow-up TTE demonstrated normal RV cavity size and function.

