A 40-year-old female patient with a history of basal cell skin cancer of the left shoulder presented for medical treatment for heart failure (HF) of a high functional class. Echocardiography revealed a mass in the cavity of the left atrium. Outflow was prevented from the left atrium and the orifice of the mitral valve (MV) was partially obturated, leading to the formation of critical mitral stenosis.

An operation was planned to remove the formation in the left atrium. The mass was an oval lobular tissue of light yellow color, soft elastic consistency and 4.0 × 4.5 × 3.5 cm in size. Histological examination revealed a small cell tumor growing from the endocardium. There were notable areas of hypo- and hypercellularity in the tumor. Cells were spindle-shaped, without clear borders, and nuclei were round and elongated with finely dispersed chromatin and with single small nucleoli in separate cells. The tumor stroma was loose, myxoid, and vascularized with a few thin-walled vessels. Mildly diffuse and small-focal infiltration by small lymphocytes was observed.

Immunohistochemical study of tumor cells revealed cytoplasmic expression of vimentin, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and pan-cytokeratin; Ki-67 was 5%. Low mitotic activity, a lack of invasive tumor growth, necrotic foci, and mild cellular atypia led to a diagnosis of an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of the heart.

The early postoperative period was complicated by postpericardiotomy syndrome, which was treated successfully. Control echocardiography showed no intracavitary formations of the left atrium. The patient received a long course of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory therapy in the postoperative period.

After 2 years, the patient again exhibited signs of high-functional HF. Echocardiography revealed the formation of the left atrium with severe obstruction of the MV and with the formation of high pulmonary hypertension. With the consideration of the pos-sibility of embolic complications, an emergency operation was performed to remove the left atrium mass through the right atrium and the interatrial septum. The tumor resection was performed through a 2-atrial approach. The right atrium was opened, and access to the left atrium was gained through a small incision in the interatrial septum. The tumor was attached to the left atrium wall via a broad and long stalk, and it was not possible to remove it entirely because the tumor had infiltrated the pulmonary veins. Therefore, the tumor was removed with the maximum possible tissue capture, including the adjacent atrial tissue. A 3 × 3-cm xenopericardial patch was sutured to the defect on the posterior wall of the left atrium.

The removed mass measured 5.0 × 4.0 × 2.5 cm, lobulated, partially covered with smooth endocar-dium, light yellow on section, with dark red and orange foci. On histological examination, the formation was a lobular tumor covered with endot-helium of polymorphic, atypical spindle-shaped, and rounded cells. The tumor stroma was myxomatous with extensive areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. An immunohistochemical examination of tumor cells revealed p53, vimentin, smooth muscle, MUC4, and MDM2. Focal expression of CD56 was observed, and Ki-67 was 20%. When we considered the pronounced cellular atypia, the high proliferative activity, and the presence of a necrosis zone, the patient was diagnosed with myxofibrosar-coma.

The postoperative period proceeded without complications. The patient did not receive chemot-herapy or radiation therapy. The patient was regularly observed by an oncologist.

One year after the above episode, the patient again began to exhibit symptoms of high-functional HF. Echocardiography revealed a formation occupying nearly all the left atrium cavity, tightly fused with the MV cusp. Severe mitral stenosis with failure and pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary artery pressure of 97 mm Hg were functionally determined.

With the high risk of embolic complications, obstruction of the MV, and development of pulmonary edema, emergency surgical intervention was required. However, the size of the tumor, tumor invasion into the cusp of the MV, and a possible invasion into the myocardium did not allow resection of the tumor; therefore, a heart transplant was planned.

During the heart transplant, the recipient’s heart was partially dissected, leaving the posterior wall of the left atrium intact, according to the Dreyfus technique. On inspection of the left atrium, a mass measuring 5 × 4 × 4 cm was detected, which was attached to the fibrous ring of the MV’s posterior leaflet without invading beyond the epicardium. The upper, lower, and anterior walls of the left atrium were removed, whereas the right and left pulmonary vein collectors were preserved. To ensure the complete removal of the tumor, a portion of the left atrium's wall was excised, and a cardioectomy was performed. The pulmonary vein collectors were severed at a distance of no less than 2 cm from the tumor’s spread zone. Palpation of the parietal pericardium revealed soft tissue consistency with no signs of densification.

In the left atrium, an exophytic tumor was determined with an area of 7.0 × 3.5 cm of a lobed type with soft elastic consistency. The tumor was located along the lateral wall of the atrium, with transition to the anterior and posterior walls. The invasion of the tumor was also deter-mined to the anterior and posterior cusps of the MV in the form of protruding plaques measuring 1.0 × 0.1 cm.

On histological examination, the tumor showed polymorphic cells with indistinct cell boundaries. Zones of hyper- and hypocellularity of the tumor were determined. The cytoplasm of the cells was a weakly basophilic, process-like, and homogeneous in most of the cells, with fine-grained appearance in some cells. Cell nuclei were polymorphic (from small, rounded forms to giant shapeless ones). Chromatin in the nuclei was fine-grained; in most cells, 1 or 2 large nucleoli were visualized. Mitotic activity was assessed as 5 mitoses per 10 high-power field. The tumor stroma was abundant and myxoid. Zones of hemorrhagic necrosis of the tumor and focal fibrin deposits on the surface were observed. The endocardium under the tumor was sharply thickened because of acellular fibrosis and hyalinosis. Lymphocyte-macrophage infiltrates were determined focally in the endocar-dium under the tumor. In the area of the posto-perative scar, granulomas from multinuclear giant cells of foreign bodies and lymphocytes around the suture material were observed. Tumor complexes were found in the resection margin of the endocardium. Under immunohistochemical examination, tumor cells showed MUC4, MDM2, and smooth muscle actin, and Ki-67 was 9.1%. The fluorescence in situ hybridization test showed the presence of amplification in the MDM2 gene.

With these considerations, the patient was diagno-sed with myxofibrosarcoma of the heart with creeping growth along the endocardium without invasion into the myocardium, of grade 1 (3 points) per the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group, pT1R1 (pTNM, American Joint Committee on Cancer).

An endomyocardial biopsy 14 days after HT revealed a crisis of antibody-mediated rejection grade 2, which was successfully stopped by day 30 after surgery. The patient is currently receiving standard immunosuppressive therapy. The control computed tomography scan of the heart with intravenous contrasting and positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan at 4 months after heart transplant did not show the presence of a tumor.

With the consideration of possible ex juvantibus targeted therapy, we decided to try to identify the damage in possible molecular pathways of carcinogenesis. It is widely known that a subset of myxofibrosarcoma is associated with mutations in the ALK gene. In addition, this patient’s history of basal cell skin cancer and myxofibrosarcoma may be due to common pathways of carcinogenesis for these 2 tumors. The literature described data on mutations in the KRAS, PTEN, TP53, and RB1 genes in both basal cell carcinoma and myxofibrosarcoma.4,5 Using polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ hybridization tests, we determined that this patient does not have amplification of the ALK, KRAS, TP53, and RB1 genes in the tumor. Thus, at present, we have no basis for conducting ex juvantibus targeted therapy. To identify mutant genes and possible subsequent targeted therapy, genome sequencing was recommended.

