A man in his 40s was hospitalized in 2015 with a chief complaint of a backache. Blood tests showed an increase in immunoglobulin G (IgG, 50.1 g/L), creatinine (103.9 μmol/L) and calcium (4.12 mmol/L) and a decrease in haemoglobin (74 g/L). The bone marrow smear showed bone marrow infiltration with 23.5% plasma cells. In addition, the fourth lumbar (L4) vertebral body presented compression changes, and the first lumbar (L1) vertebra was destroyed on the X‐ray scan. Additionally, the high level of uptake of 99mTc‐methylene diphosphonate on single photon emission computed tomography in multiple bones and the above laboratory tests supported the diagnosis of IgG MM. There was no extramedullary involvement or renal dysfunction at that time.

The patient was treated with four cycles of vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone after diagnosis, and the symptoms were relieved. However, the treatment regimen was adjusted to bortezomib and dexamethasone based on the high levels of IgG (41.6 g/L) and recommendations from doctors.

However, 7 months of the discontinuation period caused his condition to worsen, and the patient developed a severe backache and a 35.5% proportion of plasma cells in 2017. The patient was treated with another three cycles of bortezomib and dexamethasone chemotherapy. In October 2018, the disease progression caused the patient to undergo further chemotherapy—three cycles of bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone—but the condition did not improve because the patient had higher levels of IgG (43.58 g/L) and a 56.5% proportion of plasma cells. In July 2019, the patient underwent two cycles of bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone.

Later, in December 2019, the computed tomography result showed a thickened intestinal wall, and symptoms of melena indicated intestinal infiltration. Ixazomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone therapy was initiated accordingly. In January 2020, during the second course of ixazomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone chemotherapy, descending colon infiltration, causing worse melena, was detected. The patient had symptoms of wheezing and palpitations and was diagnosed with cardiac dysfunction with an increase in serum N‐terminal pro‐brain natriuretic peptide (NT‐proBNP) of 4253 pg/mL and a decrease in ejection fraction (EF) of 47%. He had to complete another three cycles of bortezomib, doxorubicin hydrochloride liposome and dexamethasone (BAD) in February 2020. Meanwhile, hydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone were prescribed to treat heart failure. However, heart failure persisted with elevated NT‐proBNP levels between 4942 and 8662 pg/mL from 16 January to 7 June and EF reduction from 47% in January to 42% in June. Serum cardiac troponin‐T gradually increased from normal to 0.133 ng/mL in June. At the end of June, the patient's heart failure further progressed, with a peak NT‐proBNP level of 32 299 pg/mL and a lowest EF of 30%, indicating a severe and advanced condition. In addition, serum light chain κ increased to 8110 mg/dL with serum light chain λ within the normal range. Acute renal injury occurred with the highest creatinine level of 273.7 μmol/L and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 21.97 mL/min/1.73 m2.

The patient refused to use daratumumab due to economic considerations. Considering the uncontrolled heart failure and multiple organ involvement, we gave him anti‐BCMA CAR‐T‐cell therapy as compassionate use. Lymphodepletion, a pre‐CAR‐T course of lymphocyte‐directed chemotherapy to reduce circulating immune cells and augment CAR‐T‐cell expansion, was administered on days −6, −5, and −4 with fludarabine (total dose 90 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (total dose 900 mg/m2), followed by an infusion of 2 × 106 anti‐BCMA CAR‐T cells/kg on day 1. Afterward, on day 1, the patient developed grade I cytokine release syndrome (CRS), consisting of fever >38°C and increased cytokines and C‐reactive protein, which was well controlled by nonsteroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs. Slight bone marrow suppression, characterized by leukopenia, was relieved by granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor. Taken together, the side effects of CAR‐T‐cell therapy were moderate and well‐controlled.

In terms of heart failure, NT‐proBNP decreased rapidly by more than 80% to 6358 pg/mL within 1 week. Ultrasound showed better cardiac systolic function with an increase in EF from 30% to 56% and fractional shortening (FS) from 15% to 29% within 1 week. Meanwhile, serum creatinine decreased to 82.6 μmol/L, and estimated glomerular filtration rate increased to 93.53 mL/min/1.73 m2 within 1 week and remained normal for 6 months after cell infusion. After 1 month, IgG decreased by 58.5% to 26.7 g/L, and serum light chain κ decreased by 45.9% to 4390 mg/dL. The patient achieved negative minimal residual disease profiles, urine protein electrophoresis with immunofixation, and plasma cells by bone marrow smear, as well as a normal ratio of serum κ/λ free light chain (FLC).

During the 1‐year follow‐up, the patient maintained complete response‐minimal residual disease with negative serum and urine protein electrophoresis with immunofixation. In addition, NT‐proBNP was low at a level of 738.1 pg/mL, and EF increased to 54%.

Over 2 years later, the patient lived a relatively healthy life, without heart failure or haematological relapse. He remained negative for minimal residual disease and had normal serum and urinary κ/λ FLC ratios. His cardiac systolic function further improved with increases in EF, FS, and SV to 63%, 34%, and 80 mL, respectively, with NT‐proBNP decreasing to 520 pg/mL. Cardiac contrast‐enhanced magnetic resonance imaging supported the diagnosis of AL‐CA with diffuse subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement and elevation of ECV and T1 mapping (42 ± 2% and 1361 ± 251 ms, respectively). Echocardiography also had the characteristic of AL‐CA with thickening of atrial and ventricular septa, as well as mitral and tricuspid valves, and granular sparkling of myocardial walls, with apical sparing. Even though we could not perform histological biopsy in any tissue due to the patient's reluctance, AL‐CA was highly suspected. Overall, the patient's clinical profile supported that anti‐BCMA CAR‐T‐cell therapy could successfully treat MM‐induced severe heart failure, with suspected underlying AL‐CA, by maintaining a good haematological response, improving the patient's cardiac function and prolonging his survival.

Echocardiograms 2 years after CAR‐T‐cell therapy. Echocardiography showed reduced left ventricular diastolic function with a peak mitral inflow velocity of 1.4 m/s, a septal mitral annular velocity e′ of 4 cm/s, a lateral mitral annular velocity e′ of 7 cm/s and E/e′ >14. M‐mode echocardiography demonstrated normal systolic function with an ejection fraction of 63%. Thickening of atrial and ventricular septa, as well as mitral and tricuspid valves, and granular sparkling of myocardial walls were present in the apical four‐chamber view. Left ventricular longitudinal peak systolic strain (LS) was assessed using standard apical views. The apical sparing pattern of LS was quantified by expressing the average apical LS (−23.4%) as a quotient of the sum of the average mid (−12.8%) and basal (−9.0%) LS values. This quotient was defined as relative apical LS. The relative apical strain in this case was 1.07. A cutoff value of 1.0 was used in the study of Phelan et al. 3 to differentiate cardiac amyloidosis from other causes of left ventricle hypertrophy. CAR‐T, chimeric antigen receptor‐modified T.

