A 50-year-old man presented to his primary care provider with a 2-week history of progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion and chest discomfort while in the flat position. He described his dyspnea as a feeling of “breathing through a straw.” Additional symptoms included a weight gain of 5 kg in the prior 3 weeks, increased abdominal girth, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. He also noticed a decline in exercise tolerance from a prior ability to ascend 9 flights of stairs to tolerating only a few steps. He denied fevers, chills, night sweats, palpitations, lightheadedness, or dizziness. He had no recent upper respiratory illness symptoms, such as nasal congestion, sore throat, cough, or sinus pain. His medical history was notable for a small, congenital ventricular septal defect (VSD), obesity (body mass index, 35 kg/m2) and seasonal allergies. His only medication included fexofenadine. He never used tobacco products and reported an average alcohol intake of 2 to 3 beverages per week. In terms of family history, he has a brother with a history of atrial fibrillation; otherwise, there was no family medical history of heart failure or premature coronary artery disease. On physical examination, he was tachycardic with a heart rate of 148 beats per minute with an irregularly irregular rhythm, bibasilar crackles, abdominal distention, jugular venous distension, hepatojugular reflux, and 1+, symmetric, bilateral lower extremity pitting edema.

The clinical findings are not suggestive of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. There is no history of smoking and no wheezing on physical examination. His symptoms are consistent with a classic presentation of CHF. Patients with volume overload secondary to CHF often demonstrate dyspnea on exertion, weight gain, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. He also has physical examination findings of bibasilar crackles, pitting edema, and abdominal distension. The progressive nature of dyspnea is less consistent with pulmonary embolus or an acute coronary syndrome. Although constrictive pericarditis can manifest with jugular venous distension and chest discomfort in the flat position, he does not have pleuritic chest pain, fever, or a friction rub on physical examination.

His laboratory studies were the following: hemoglobin, 16.0 g/dL; sodium, 143 mmol/L; creatinine, 1.2 mg/dL; low density lipoprotein, 77 U/L; high density lipoprotein, 54 mg/dL, triglycerides, 88 mg/dL; total cholesterol, 137 mg/dL; thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), 2.0 mlU/L. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response (RVR) at rate of 148 beats per minute (bpm) without ST-T segment changes suggestive of ischemia. Chest radiography demonstrated new mild cardiomegaly.

Right heart catheterization would provide additional hemodynamic information including cardiac output, filling pressures, and central venous pressure; however, it is not routinely indicated in new diagnosis of heart failure. A TTE is a first-line diagnostic test in new cases of heart failure to assess for left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and structural changes, such as wall motion abnormalities or ventricular dilatation or hypertrophy. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can be used to evaluate assess wall motion abnormalities, function, and myocardial tissue perfusion, injury, infiltration, fibrosis, and viability, but is not an appropriate initial test. Endomyocardial biopsies are reserved for patients with progressively worsening heart failure despite appropriate medical therapy, for whom amyloidosis, hemochromatosis, or giant-cell myocarditis is suspected. Coronary angiogram can be considered in new diagnoses of heart failure to determine whether there is an ischemic etiology or reversible ischemia, especially in patients with risk factors. However, angiography would not be the first diagnostic test.

His TTE showed an LVEF of 25% with severe generalized left ventricular hypokinesis, moderate right ventricular enlargement with moderate reduction in right ventricular systolic function, right ventricular systolic pressure of 56 mm Hg, severe left atrial enlargement, and mitral and tricuspid annulus dilatation with secondary functional severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. There was no change in his congenital VSD. At the time of the study, he was notably tachycardic (132 bpm). An ECG 1 year ago showed an LVEF of 60%, no regional wall motion abnormalities, normal right ventricular size and systolic function, small membranous VSD with restrictive left-to-right shunt, mild tricuspid regurgitation, mild mitral regurgitation, trivial aortic stenosis, and trivial aortic regurgitation.

His clinical symptomatology of CHF and LVEF less than 50% classifies the diagnosis of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).

Along with a TTE, initial diagnostic evaluation for acute CHF presentations should include a 12-lead ECG to evaluate for acute myocardial infarction, tachyarrhythmia, conduction abnormalities, or left ventricular hypertrophy. A chest radiography should be obtained to evaluate for an acute cardiopulmonary process such as pneumonia, pulmonary edema, or pneumothorax. Other initial laboratory studies should include a complete blood cell count (CBC) with differential, electrolyte levels, creatinine, N-terminal-pro b-type natriuretic peptide, troponin level, urinalysis, lipid panel and TSH. Coronary artery disease causes approximately two thirds of CHF, and an acute coronary syndrome should be suggested as a cause of new-onset heart failure if there are elevated troponin levels, new ECG abnormalities, an acute onset of symptoms, or concurrent signs and symptoms of systemic hypoperfusion.1 Hyponatremia, if present, is a poor prognostic factor.2

The patient also had an ECG Holter monitor revealing of atrial fibrillation with heart rates varying from 93–179 bpm (average, 126 bpm) with RVR occurring 99.9% of the time captured. He reported dyspnea while in atrial fibrillation with RVR. He was given furosemide and metoprolol tartrate by his primary care physician with plans to titrate to heart rates slower than 110 bpm.

Three beta blockers with beta-1 activity have been shown to decrease mortality in heart failure: carvedilol, bisoprolol, and metoprolol succinate. A switch to atenolol would not be appropriate. There is some debate as to whether carvedilol is superior to metoprolol in mortality reduction, as shown by the COMET trial in 2003.3 In this study, carvedilol had better reduction in mortality rate compared with metoprolol tartrate. Carvedilol has alpha blockade properties that is speculated to be beneficial by facilitating vasodilation, glucose uptake, and insulin sensitivity. Of note, because the COMET trial used the tartrate formulation instead of the extended-release succinate form, a definite superiority between metoprolol succinate and carvedilol cannot be determined. Beta blocker dose response relationship to reduction in mortality has been shown; patients should be uptitrated on beta blockers as tolerated in HFrEF and until rate control is achieved in atrial fibrillation. Furosemide is a more appropriate diuretic than hydrochlorothiazide. Dosing should be based on volume status; however, there is no dose-dependent relationship to mortality outcomes. ICD placement consideration is indicated for primary prophylaxis against sudden cardiac death in patients with New York Heart Association Class II or III HFrEF with LVEF less than 35% after 3 months of optimal medical management. However, patients should be on optimal medical treatment and treated for reversible underlying etiologies before ICD implantation consideration. Similarly, mitral valve replacement is not indicated at this time, as his severe mitral regurgitation is functional and could improve with treatment of reversible causes. The 2014 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society recommends long-term anticoagulation based on thromboembolic risk as determined by the CHA2DS2-VASC Score. This patient began taking long-term apixaban considering his moderate risk stratification (CHA2DS2-VASC score of 1 for heart failure, or 0.6% stroke per year risk), low LVEF with ventricular dilatation, and low bleeding risk. He transitioned to carvedilol for beta blockade, started taking lisinopril, and continued with furosemide as directed by his cardiologist.

His HFrEF was thought to be most likely due to tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy. Initial clues were new reduced LVEF with generalized hypokinesis in the setting of a new diagnosis of atrial fibrillation with predominant RVR on ECG Holter monitoring.

On a return visit to his primary care physician, the patient had persistently elevated heart rates to the 130-bpm range despite being uptitrated on carvedilol therapy. His in-clinic blood pressure was 104/81 mm Hg.

Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy results from prolonged elevated heart rate, which is often reversible upon control of the arrhythmia or heart rate. The goal of initial therapy is to achieve rate control. Increasing beta blockade would be an option for achieving rate control in this patient. However, rate control may be difficult to achieve with beta blockade in patients with rapid ventricular rates and new reduction of ejection fraction (EF)das in this case. Therefore, early electrical cardioversion is warranted to reduce the risk of further progression of HFrEF. Pacemaker placement is not indicated. ICD referral may be warranted at a later time, if left ventricular systolic function does not recover after appropriate medical therapy. Aspirin and clopidogrel are not indicated in heart failure or atrial fibrillation.

Because of this patient’s markedly depressed EF, a TEE-guided direct cardioversion was pursued urgently; it was successful after the third synchronous shock of 100, 120, and 150 J. The TEE also showed severe left atrial enlargement, along with previously seen severe mitral regurgitation and severe tricuspid regurgitation. An ECG after cardioversion showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 94 bpm with premature atrial complexes.

Although direct electric cardioversion is an effective way to revert to sinus rhythm, there is a high rate of atrial fibrillation recurrence, with as few as 23% of patients remaining in sinus rhythm after 1 year. Risk factors for reverting back to arrhythmia included duration of arrhythmia, atrial fibrillation (vs atrial flutter), and age. The patient was started on amiodarone after his cardioversion because of his severe left atrial enlargement and concern for early relapse.

Amiodarone can cause adverse effects of long-term use, including pulmonary toxicity, thyroid dysfunction, hepatotoxicity. The risks and benefits of continuing the drug should be discussed with the patient. Baseline tests include chest radiography, pulmonary function tests, thyroid function tests, and transaminases. Hematologic, renal, and cardiac toxicities are uncommon; thus, CBC/peripheral smear/lactic acid dehydrogenase, sodium/potassium/creatinine, ECG Holter and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, and cardiac catheterization are not routine studies before starting amiodarone.

Repeated TTE 2 months later showed a significantly improved EF of 52%, with mildemoderate left ventricular enlargement, mild generalized hypokinesis, and borderline right ventricular enlargement with borderline decreased systolic function and estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 32 mm Hg. The degree of mitral regurgitation had improved to mildemoderate severity and tricuspid regurgitation was trivial. The patient had a weight loss of 15 kg while taking furosemide and overall symptomatic improvement with increased exercise capacity.

Four months later, a repeated TTE revealed a decline in EF to 35%−40 %, with substantial beat-to-beat variability, return of atrial fibrillation with RVR, moderate left ventricular hypokinesis, borderline decrease in right ventricular systolic function, and mild to moderate mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation. His heart rate was 111 bpm. He underwent repeat direct current cardioversion. Follow-up TTE 2 months after repeated direct current cardioversion showed improvement of his EF again to 61% without regional wall motion abnormalities and a mildly enlarged left ventricle. Long-term therapy with amiodarone was discussed with this patient, but not pursued because of potential adverse effects.

Given recurrent episodes of atrial fibrillation, and subsequent reduced EF with each of these episodes, the decision was made to pursue a rhythm control strategy, and the patient underwent atrial fibrillation ablative therapy. He remained asymptomatic 6 months later, with no recurrent episodes, and maintained his left ventricular systolic function (EF = 61%).

