In March 2017, a 67-year-old man with hypertension, type 2 diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, coronary artery disease, stage 2 chronic kidney disease, and metastatic UM was electively admitted to undergo catheter-directed local cytokine-based IE for liver metastases. He had been diagnosed with UM approximately one year earlier and had undergone plaque brachytherapy with adjuvant valproic acid in a clinical trial. He was removed from the trial after new liver lesions were confirmed as metastatic disease. An echocardiogram 6 months before his current presentation showed normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function, mild LV diastolic dysfunction, normal RV size and function, and a normal estimated pulmonary artery (PA) pressure.

On admission, the patient reported only chronic lower back pain. He was alert and oriented, with normal vital signs. Laboratory results were notable only for stable chronic kidney disease (creatinine, 1.2 mg/dL). We measured his serum levels of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) with use of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (R&D Systems, a Bio-Techne brand), and analyzed his serum cytokine and chemokine levels by using a bead-based Multiplex® assay with Luminex® technology (Millipore Sigma).

The next morning, we entered his right hepatic artery with use of a transfemoral microcatheter. We injected 1,500 μg of GM-CSF and 2,000,000 IU of interleukin (IL)-2 suspended in 5 mL of ethiodized oil, then used interventional radiology and IE to embolize the hepatic artery with gelatin sponge particles. No procedural complications occurred, and the patient was returned to his room for overnight observation.

Approximately 11 hours after IE, the patient experienced mild hypoxemia (pulse oximetry saturation, 88%) that improved when 2 L/min of supplemental oxygen was supplied through a nasal cannula. A chest radiograph showed linear atelectasis of his right lower lobe. During the next several hours, he became febrile (100.6 °F), tachycardic (106 beats/min), tachypneic (24 breaths/min), and progressively hypoxemic (pulse oximetry saturation, 94% on 6 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannula).

Laboratory results included leukopenia (white blood cell count, 1.3 ×109/L; 36% lymphocytes), elevated liver enzyme levels with a hepatocellular injury pattern (total bilirubin, 1.3 mg/dL; alkaline phosphatase, 369 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase [AST], 2,049 IU/L; and alanine aminotransferase [ALT], 1,647 IU/L), lactic acidosis (lactate, 6.5 mmol/L), an elevated cardiac troponin T level (0.08 ng/mL), an elevated N-terminal-pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level (3,711 pg/mL), and acute kidney injury (creatinine, 1.8 mg/dL). An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with normal intervals and no ischemic changes. Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy results were negative for segmental perfusion defects. Chest computed tomograms without contrast revealed scattered parenchymal nodules, mild interstitial edema, mild PA dilation, and, as expected, persistent embolic material within the liver. The patient's respiratory status rapidly declined during the next several hours despite aggressive intravenous diuretic and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. He was started on noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation and was transferred to intensive care during the morning of hospital day 3, approximately 24 hours after IE.

The patient became disoriented to time and place. An echocardiogram obtained during positive-pressure ventilation showed a mildly dilated RV with hyperdynamic apical motion associated with hypokinesis of remaining segments (the McConnell sign), mild-to-moderate tricuspid insufficiency, severe pulmonary hypertension (estimated right atrial pressure, 10 mmHg; estimated PA systolic pressure, 73 mmHg), and a hyperdynamic LV without segmental wall-motion abnormalities. Concerned about possible capillary leak syndrome (CLS), we administered 8 mg of intravenous dexamethasone. Despite all interventions, the patient's respiratory and mental status continued to decline, and he needed endotracheal intubation and ventilator placement approximately 36 hours after IE.

Overnight on hospital day 3, the patient's rapidly progressive hemodynamic instability necessitated multiple sequential vasopressor infusions. Serial bloodwork results included increasing transaminase levels (AST, 2,944 IU/L; ALT, 2,364 IU/L), coagulopathy (international normalized ratio, 2.14), and increased cardiac troponin T (peak level, 1.37 ng/mL). An ECG then showed sinus tachycardia with 1-mm ST-segment elevations in leads II, aVR, V1, and V2, and 2-mm ST-segment depressions in leads I, II, aVL, V5, and V6. An echocardiogram showed the McConnell sign with an underfilled and persistently hyperdynamic LV. We initiated epoprostenol inhalation therapy for acute pulmonary hypertension and acute RV failure (cor pulmonale).

Echocardiograms obtained during the morning of hospital day 4 indicated progressive RV enlargement and severe global RV dysfunction, RV apical dysfunction, and a smaller, underfilled LV. A right-sided ECG revealed sinus tachycardia with 1- to 1.5-mm ST-segment elevation in leads V3R and V4R, suggesting acute RV myocardial infarction (MI). Emergency cardiac catheterization was not possible because of the patient's progressive hemodynamic instability. Systemic thrombolytic therapy was considered; however, the patient had a cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity, and he died.

Autopsy findings included mild-to-moderate coronary artery atherosclerosis without substantial stenosis, mild bilateral pulmonary edema, and multiple liver metastases from primary UM. There was no evidence of acute MI, acute pulmonary embolism (PE), or acute myocarditis. No obvious cause of death was identified.

In search of answers, we reexamined our patient's laboratory results. Before IE, his transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) concentration had been 12,931 pg/mL, much higher than the mean reference level of 3,111 ± 2,464 pg/mL in 23 previous patients with UM before liver-directed IE (unpublished data). Our patient's baseline levels of IL-6 (<0.9 pg/mL), IL-8 (7.7 pg/mL), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) (7.68 pg/mL), and GM-CSF (<3 pg/mL) were similar to those of the previous patients. However, on posttreatment day 1, his IL-6 and IL-8 concentrations were 673.3 and 2,093 pg/mL, respectively; on day 2, they decreased to 448.8 and 692.2 pg/mL. On those same days, his TNF-α levels (54.9 and 8.2 pg/mL) and GM-CSF levels (11.5 and 8.9 pg/mL) did not differ greatly from those in the other patients who had undergone liver-directed IE. We considered these factors in the differential diagnosis.

