A sixty-eight-year-old gentleman underwent orthotopic heart transplantation in February 2020. The donor was cytomegalovirus-seronegative with recipient seropositive; both donor and recipient were Toxoplasma-seronegative. His post-operative course was complicated by prolonged intubation, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, hyperglycemia requiring intravenous insulin, and acute renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy (that resolved prior to discharge). He was discharged March 2020 on prednisone oral (PO) 10 mg/d, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) PO 250 mg twice daily (BID), tacrolimus PO 4 mg in morning/5 mg in evening and prophylactic antimicrobials (atovaquone, nystatin, valganciclovir).

He was readmitted two months later with complaints of non-productive cough with non-bloody diarrhea for one week; fevers (highest temperature 38.6 °Celsius) for two days; and a one-day history of sternal wound discharge. His family members reported fevers with respiratory symptoms.

His past medical history was significant for coronary artery disease (treated with coronary artery bypass graft and stenting); ischemic cardiomyopathy leading to American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) stage D chronic systolic heart failure necessitating intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) and left ventricular assist device placement, followed by heart transplant; type-2-DM, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, obstructive sleep apnea and prior smoking.

On evaluation, he was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. Systemic examination revealed dehiscence of lower aspect of sternal incision, with minimal foul-smelling serosanguinous drainage. Respiratory and cardiovascular system examination was otherwise unremarkable. Admission laboratory testing revealed white blood cell count 7.820 × 109/L (normal range {N}: 3.8–10.5 × 109/L), lymphocyte count 0.2 × 109/L (N: 1.0–3.0 × 109/L) and elevated inflammatory markers–C-reactive protein 1612.38 nmol/L (N: 0–3.81 nmol/L), procalcitonin 0.72 μg/L (N: 0.02–0.10 μg/L), lactate dehydrogenase 6083.33 nmol/(s•L) [N: 833.33–4033.33 nmol/(s•L), ferritin 1.15 nmol/L (N: 0.07–0.90 nmol/L) and D-dimer 1194 μg/L DDU (N: ≤ 229 μg/L DDU). Computed tomography imaging (CT) of chest/abdomen/pelvis revealed central and peripheral ground-glass opacities in right middle, lingular and bilateral lower lobes, with bilateral interlobular septal thickening in lower lobes. There were no fluid collections noted at the sternotomy site in the CT scan. Nasopharyngeal testing by reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction detected SARS-Cov-2 virus, confirming the diagnosis of COVID-19.

Infectious diseases service was consulted for assistance in management. Given the ongoing use of immunosuppressive agents, he was not eligible for use of interleukin-inhibitors. He met criteria for enrollment in the antiviral remdesivir trial; however, study recruitment had closed at that time. Initiation of oral hydroxychloroquine (per the institutional COVID-19 protocol at the time) was held due to concurrent amiodarone use and prolonged QTc-interval. He received one convalescent plasma infusion after inclusion in the ongoing trial. He was started on empiric intravenous (IV) vancomycin and meropenem for suspected sternal wound infection. Plastics surgery performed bedside sternal wound debridement, followed by wound vacuum therapy (“wound vac”) placement. Sternal wound cultures grew Morganella morganni and Enterobacter cloacae, with blood cultures also revealing growth of Morganella.

His hospital course was further complicated by encephalopathy, respiratory decompensation necessitating intubation and mechanical ventilation; acute kidney injury necessitating hemodialysis; and recurrent infections (vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium bacteremia, Klebsiella variicola sternal wound infection, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species bacteremia). He required debridement of sternal wound with reconstruction using pectoralis major muscle flaps. Given the multiple infections, MMF was discontinued and cyclosporine was initiated. He was evaluated by the Rheumatology service for polyarticular gout symptoms. He received a three-day course of IV methylprednisolone, followed by a fifteen-day oral prednisone taper. His prednisone dose was subsequently decreased to 7.5 mg/d PO, so fungal prophylaxis (nystatin) was discontinued per institutional protocol. He underwent bedside tracheostomy one month after admission, with decannulation performed two months after admission. After completing the antibiotic courses, he underwent chest wall reconstruction using omental flap and split-thickness skin grafting.

Approximately three months after admission, purplish skin discoloration with fluctuant swelling was noted in the right axilla, at the prior IABP catheter insertion site. CT chest revealed a 6.4 × 5.3 cm fluid collection along the anterior right upper chest wall, with extensive inflammatory changes in the chest wall and surrounding tissues. There was a 1.3 cm right subclavian artery pseudoaneurysm at the vascular graft site (concerning for mycotic aneurysm). 75 ml of brown fluid was aspirated from the collection by interventional radiology. A rare mold with broad coenocytic/aseptate hyphae was noted on preliminary cultures and was sent to the state reference laboratory for further evaluation. He was started on IV liposomal amphotericin B 550 mg/d and posaconazole delayed-release PO 300 mg/d. Serum markers for fungal infections were normal–(1–3)-β-D-Glucan level 43 pg/mL (N: < 60 pg/mL) and Aspergillus (Galactomannan) antigen < 0.5 index (N: < 0.5). The state laboratory identified the fungus as Rhizopus microsporus.

He underwent exploration and debridement of the thoracic cavity in the operating room. The mold was tunneling under the omentum, extending deep in the right chest cavity and into the musculature. It involved an area of approximately 15 × 5 × 4 cm in size, with burrowing towards the sternal wound. Resection of the subclavian artery and potentially infected prosthetic graft was also performed, with primary repair of the proximal and distal ends. After debridement, wound vac was applied to the sternal wound. Operative sternal wound cultures redemonstrated growth of R. microsporus, while subclavian graft cultures were negative.

His hospital course was further complicated by vancomycin-resistant E. faecium and later daptomycin-resistant E. faecium sternal wound infections; chest wall abscesses with Enterobacter cloacae; and development of sacral decubitus ulcers (managed with local wound care). He eventually developed polymicrobial septic shock (with vancomycin-resistant E. faecium, daptomycin-resistant E. faecium and multi-drug-resistant K. variicola). He was intubated for hypercapneic respiratory failure and worsening encephalopathy. He had worsening vasopressor requirements and unfortunately died on day one-hundred-and-seventy-five of hospital stay.

