A 70-year-old man (170 cm, 48 kg, American Society of Anaesthesiologists status IV) had a history of HFrEF with dilated cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He was scheduled to undergo debridement of skin necrosis in the right leg. He had developed right leg weakness 4 months previously and was diagnosed with thrombotic occlusion of the right ilio-femoral artery. Skin necrosis appeared on the anterolateral side of the lower leg. While being treated for the skin lesion, his HF was treated with spironolactone, ivabradine, sacubitril/valsartan, and warfarin (1.5 mg) to optimise cardiopulmonary function. He had also received an implanted defibrillator 3 months previously.

Despite inotropic administration, the patient’s systolic and diastolic blood pressure was 70 and 40 mmHg, respectively. His coagulation profile showed that the activated prothrombin time was 49.4 s and the prothrombin time/international normalised ratio was 1.63. However, anticoagulation therapy was continued because of the high risk of thromboembolism. The initial BNP level was 837 pg/mL, which decreased to 216 pg/mL just before surgery after treating the HF. Chest radiography showed pneumonic infiltration in the right lung (mainly in the right lower lobe) and diffuse emphysematous changes in both lungs. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed global hypokinesia with severe left ventricular dysfunction, an ejection fraction of 11%, an enlarged left atrium and ventricular chamber, and grade II diastolic dysfunction.

Regional anaesthesia was considered safer than general anaesthesia because of the patient’s unstable cardiopulmonary function, but a neuraxial block was contraindicated owing to anticoagulation therapy. Therefore, we used a USG sciatic nerve and fascia iliaca compartment block to cover the operative field and avoid haemodynamic instability. However, the scheduled operation was postponed because the patient strongly requested only general anaesthesia and refused regional anaesthesia using a PNB. He had previously undergone wound dressing changes with local anaesthesia, and suffered from excruciating pain. Because of this previous experience, he was afraid that he might feel severe pain during the operation because of failure of the nerve block. Several counselling sessions were held to provide sufficient information to the patient, along with emotional support to overcome his fear and optimise the anaesthesia.

Standard monitoring, including non-invasive blood pressure monitoring, three-lead electrocardiography, and pulse oximetry, were applied before the nerve block, and the left brachial artery was cannulated for continuous blood pressure monitoring. Supplemental oxygen was administered through a facial mask at 5 L/minute. The patient was positioned laterally for the popliteal sciatic nerve block. A high-frequency linear transducer (HFL38x®; SonoSite, Bothell, WA, USA) was transversely placed on the posterior aspect of the popliteal fossa, and the sciatic nerve was located. Under real-time ultrasound (M-Turbo®; SonoSite) guidance, a 25 G needle was inserted 5 cm from the popliteal crease using the in-plane approach. Once the needle tip was near the distal sciatic nerve, 40 mL of 0.375% ropivacaine was injected around the sciatic nerve after confirming negative blood aspiration. Subsequently, the patient was placed in the supine position for the fascia iliaca compartment block. Using the same ultrasound transducer, the fascia lata and fascia iliaca were checked. A 20-mL aliquot of 0.25% ropivacaine was injected into the plane between the fascia iliaca and iliopsoas muscles after checking for negative aspiration. A loss of sensation was confirmed in the surgical area after 30 minutes. The surgery commenced after confirming adequate sensory block. During the operation, the patient did not require any analgesics or rescue block, and haemodynamic parameters were stable. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit after surgery for close monitoring because of his severely compromised cardiopulmonary function. Haemodynamic stability was confirmed and he was transferred to the general ward the next day. Thereafter, the patient underwent wound debridement twice more and finally received a skin autograft at the defect site. All of these surgical procedures were successfully performed using the same PNB techniques. After the skin graft, the patient was discharged from the hospital without any symptoms, such as dyspnoea or surgical site pain.

